# allelic_imbalance_analysis
# My project at the Furey Lab has been to study allelic imbalance in coding and noncoding regions in Crohn's Disease patient samples. A full description of the project is located below. 
# The Allelic Imbalance Pipeline image shows where each script is used
# The create_personal_genome script is part of a process to convert a haploid reference genome to a custom diploid genome for each sample.
# The allele_flipper script iterates through a .bam file, generating reads from the 5' to 3' direction that are outputted in one .fastq file, and other reads from 3' to 5' in another .fastq file. Each read has two copies; one with the reference allele and one with the alternate allele. These alleles and their locations are found in the other input, a .bed file. 
  
  Crohn’s Disease is an Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD) that affects up to 3 million Americans (Dahlhamer et al. 167). Crohn’s Disease is heterogeneous, so it is expressed by a multitude of phenotypes. Due to the variety in phenotypes, progression and response to treatment is highly variable. We believe the solution to understanding the disease lies in the molecular characteristics of the colonic and intestinal tissue. By understanding the molecular basis behind the disease, scientists can better determine progression, treatment response, and more.
  After performing Genome Wide Association Studies (GWAS), 242 loci associated with IBD have been found (Mirkov et al. 224). Individual variants in those loci were found both in coding and noncoding regions. Variants in coding regions can directly affect gene expression by changing the amino acid sequence, whereas variants in noncoding regions affect gene regulation by influencing upstream regions through a variety of methods.
  This analysis is looking at allelic imbalance, which is a phenomenon where two different alleles in the genome are expressed at different levels (Wagner et al). This is determined by sequencing a functional assay to generate a readout. We can quantify how much of the signal from the assay comes from one allele compared to the other. If there is a signaling imbalance, we can conclude that there is allelic imbalance.
  In the Fall semester of 2018, my project focused on detecting allelic imbalance in non-coding regions. To do this, we used the Assay for Transposase-Accessible Chromatin using sequencing (ATAC-seq) method, which maps chromatin accessibility genome-wide. ATAC-seq data identifies regions of open chromatin that are regulatory elements, and in doing so generates sequencing reads at these regions of open chromatin (Buenrostro et al). The result of the project for the semester was the creation of an ATAC-seq pipeline that outputted heterozygous sites that had significant allelic imbalance for each Crohn’s Disease patient. 
 
  Now, in the Spring semester of 2019, I am in a more independent role, focusing on detecting allelic imbalance in coding regions as opposed to non-coding regions. Instead of using ATAC-seq data, which mapped chromatin accessibility, we will be using RNA-seq data, which maps levels of gene transcription. RNA-seq data is a direct count of RNA molecules transcribed from the corresponding genomic sequence. This semesters work will focus on adjusting the previous ATAC-seq pipeline to work with RNA-seq data. By the end of the semester, this pipeline will be finished and allelic imbalance analysis will be conducted on several patient samples. 
Through the start of the summer, I will finish generating RNA-seq patient data for all of the samples. Then, I will perform further analysis and interpretation of this data within the context of Crohn’s Disease phenotypes. 
